# **Lesson 2-2: Expressions & Types**

  * Type Synonyms
  * Defining Types
    * Variant Types
  * Typeclasses
  * Conditional Logic
    * `if`/`then`/`else`
    *  `case` expressions
    * Literal patterns
  * Coding Break

## **Type Synonyms**
**Type synonyms** are user-defined aliases for existing types. They allow us to use more human-friendly names to refer to our types inside signatures.

We just encountered one synonym that is built into Haskell: `String`. Here is how it is defined:

```haskell
type String  =  [Char]
-- ^ the `type` keyword introduces a synonym
--   ^ synonym   ^ existing type or other synonym
```
>Like all type names, synonyms must begin with an uppercase letter.

We can define our own type synonyms in the same manner.
```haskell
type Id :: Int
```

**Type synonyms can refer to other synonyms.**
```haskell
type Name = String
```

**Type synonyms don't create new types.** \
To Haskell's compiler, GHC, there is no such type as `String`. Anywhere that this type synonym appears in a piece of code, GHC replaces it with its underlying type, `[Char]`.

**The benefits of type synonyms are exclusive to humans.** \
They help make our values and functions easier to understand by providing additional documentation. They **do not** convey any additional information about our data to the compiler.

```haskell
type Id = Int
type Quantity = Int

pikachuId :: Id
-- GHC sees: pikachuId :: Int
pikachuId = 25

partySize :: Quantity
-- GHC sees: partySize :: Int
partySize = 6

getPokemonName :: Id -> Name
getPokemonName i = ...
```

If we have some function, `getPokemonName`, which takes an `Id` value as input (like `pikachuId`) and returns the `Name` value of the corresponding Pokemon, GHC can't prevent us from accidentally applying `getPokemonName` to a `Quantity` value (like `partySize`).

```shell
GHCi> getPokemonName pikachuId
"Pikachu"
GHCi> getPokemonName partySize
"Charizard"
```

This is because to GHC:
* `getPokemonName`'s type signature is `Int -> String`
* `partySize` is a value of type `Int`
* `partySize` is thus a valid argument for `getPokemonName`, and the application will return whichever Pokemon name string is associated with that value.

This means if we supply the wrong argument by mistake, our function will return "Charizard" instead of "Pikachu", rather than giving an error!

## **Defining Types**
```haskell
data Type = Constructor
```

The left side of the definition is the *type side*: it includes the `data` keyword and the name of the type, which appears in type signatures.

The right side of the definition is the *value side*: it specifies how to construct values of the type, which will appear in the declarations of constants and functions.

```shell
GHCi> :t Constructor
Constructor :: Type
```

The `Type` type in the example above is *isomorphic* to the "unit" type (`()`):
```haskell
data () = ()
```
Notice that the name of a type and its constructor can be the same, and this is common in Haskell. This is possible because types and values inhabit different "levels" of the language, which correspond to distinct namespaces.

### **Variant Types\***
Variants are types with more than one constructor, which are separated using the `|` (pipe) symbol.

The `Bool` type is the prototypical example of a variant:

```haskell
data Bool = False | True
```
\* Variant types are also called "*sum types*"

## **Typeclasses**
A Typeclass is a collection of behaviors which are implemented differently in an ad-hoc manner by different types.

Haskell has many built-in typeclasses. We'll only be using a couple in this part of the course, but there are many more, and we can also define our own.

### **Basic Typeclasses**
|Typeclass | Behavior|
--- | ---|
|`Show`|convert a type's values to `String` values|
|`Read`|convert `String` values to a type's values|
|`Eq`|check if a type's values are equal or not|
|`Ord`|compare and order a type's values (requires `Eq` instance)|
|`Bounded`|specify maximum and minimum values for a type|
|`Enum`|enumerate a type's values|

### **Default Instances**
Haskell's compiler can define default implementations for all of the basic typeclasses above using the `deriving` keyword, followed by one or more typeclass names.

The `deriving` clause can be added to the end of the `data` declaration line, or on a separate line with indentation.

**Deriving a single instance:**
```haskell
data PokemonType = Grass | Fire | Water deriving Show
```

**Deriving multiple instances:** \
Multiple classes can be added to the `deriving` clause, but must be comma-separated and enclosed in parentheses

```haskell
data StarterPokemon = Bulbasaur | Charmander | Squirtle
  deriving (Show, Read, Eq, Ord, Bounded, Enum)
```

### **Custom Instances**
The default implementations usually give us what we need, and deriving it helps us avoid writing repetitive boilerplate code.

In some situations we want different behavior than the default implementations. We'll learn how to define our own typeclass instances in Part II of this course.

## **Conditional Logic**