# **Lesson 1-1: Expressions & Types**

* Expressions
  * Constants
  * Functions
* Values & Types
  * Simple Types
* Signatures
* Collections
  * Tuples
  * Lists
* Coding Break

## **Expressions**
An **expression** is the basic unit of Haskell code: it provides a description of some piece of data in our program.

An expression is either a simple **value** (called a **constant**), or a means to produce one (called a **function**).

Expressions are declared using an equal sign, and consist of **names** on the left side and the expression's **body** on the right.

>* Assigning names in Haskell does not require any special keywords (like `var`, `let`, `const`, `def`, `function` in other languages)
>* The names of Haskell expressions must begin with a lowercase letter or underscore, and by convention are written in `camelCase`.

### **Constants**
A **constant** is the simplest kind of expression we can declare. It has a fixed value.

```haskell
myConstant = "some value"
-- ^ name       ^ body
```

>In this course, we'll name our constants with preceding and trailing underscores and all capital letters for distinction (i.e. `_MY_CONSTANT_`)

### **Functions**
A **function** is a more complex expression which:
* Is defined with one or more **parameters** representing its input(s)
* Produces a new value as output whenever it is called

**Parameters** are variable names that can be referenced in the body. They are declared after the function's name and separated by spaces.

```haskell
myFunction x = x
-- ^ name      ^ body
--         ^ parameter
```
>The function above is a varation of the "identity" function (called `id` in Haskell). It takes an argument and just returns its value.

```haskell
twoInputs x y = x + y
```

The specific values provided as inputs to a function are called its **arguments**, and are bound to the parameter names when the function is called. When we call a function, we are *applying* it to arguments.

A function call consists of the function's name, followed by the desired arguments separated by spaces.

```shell
GHCi> myFunction 'i'
'i'
GHCi> twoInputs 1 2
3
```

A function's parameters become bound to specific values when the function is applied to its arguments.

**Composition** \
When we write programs in a functional style, we build many small, single-purpose functions

## **Values and Types**
As a **statically typed** language, Haskell consists of two distinct levels: **value level** and **type level**.

**Values** are concrete instances of data, while **Types** are collections of related values.

When we write code at the **value level**, we are "zoomed in" on specific pieces of data and how they interact with eachother. The corresponding view at the **type level** is "zoomed out" to a higher level of abstraction where we don't know anything about specific values, only their generic shape.

Every value has exactly one type

* Constant and function names in Haskell must begin with a lowercase letter, and use camel case by convention (i.e. `myPokemon`)
* Type names must begin with a capital letter (i.e. `Integer`).

### **Simple Types**
|Type | Description | Example Values|
--- | --- | ---|
|`Int`|bounded integers |`25`, `-1`, `9223372036854775807`|
|`Char`|ASCII characters |`'P'`, `'a'`, `'1'`, `'_'`|
|`Bool`|booleans |`True`, `False`|
|`()`|"unit", an empty value (equivalent to `void` in other languages) | `()`

```haskell
myPokemonId :: Int
myPokemonId = 25
```

```haskell
firstLetter :: Char
firstLetter = 'P'
```

```haskell
inPokedex :: Bool
inPokedex = True
```

## **Signatures**
**Signatures** are annotations that appear above Haskell expressions and describe the types of the data they contain.

**Signature for a constant:**
```haskell
myConstant :: SomeType -- signature
-- ^ name  ^ "has type..."
myConstant = "some value"
```

**Signature for a function:** \
Function signatures contain arrows between their inputs and outputs.
```haskell
myFunction :: SomeType -> SomeType
-- "myFunction has type SomeType to SomeType"
myFunction x = x
```

### **Type Inference**
Signatures are generally not needed, because Haskell has *type inference*: the compiler can identify and check the types of data in an expression based on its usage.

In practice, however, we include type signatures for all top-level declarations, for several reasons:
* They provide a blueprint to guide us in writing our code
* They provide built-in documentation that helps other programmers (and our future selves) understand the behavior of our code
* They provide a "sanity check", allowing the compiler to verify our code does what we intend it to do



## **Collections**
**Collections** are data structures that contain multiple values. They are examples of **parametric types**, or types that contain other types. In Haskell we say that types are *parameterized* by the types of data they contain.

Haskell has a large variety of collection types: we'll start by looking at the two most common ones, **tuples** and **lists**.

### **Tuples**
A **tuple** is the simplest collection type. They are useful for bundling multiple pieces of data into a single structure, especially when a function needs to return more than one value.

Tuples are flexible because they can contain values of differing types, but also rigid in that they have a fixed size.

They can be various sizes, the simplest being a *2-tuple* or *pair*.

```haskell
myPair :: (Int, Bool)
myPair = (33, True)
```
The structure of a tuple is represented similarly at the type and value level, but contains types within the signature and values in the declaration.

### **Lists**
A **list** (shorthand for **linked list**) is a more powerful collection type that can contain an arbitrary number of values.

Lists are the primary data structure used in basic Haskell programming. Haskell has a host of powerful built-in functions for processing lists. They are also well-suited for use in recursive functions, since linked lists are inherently recursive. We'll explore these more closely in Lesson 3.

>Lists can only contain values of a single type

```haskell
favoritePokemon :: [Char]
favoritePokemon = ['a', 'l', 'a', 'k', 'a', 'z', 'a', 'm']
```

In a signature, a list is represented with square brackets around the type of data it contains. In declarations they contain comma-separated values enclosed in brackets.

A list of characters is also called a `String`. Strings can be written more concisely by enclosing a sequence of characters in double quotes.

```haskell
favoritePokemon = "alakazam"
```

In signatures, `[Char]` and `String` can be used interchangeably. This is because `String` is not a distinct type, but rather a **synonym** for an existing type.


### **Basic Typeclasses**
|Typeclass | Behavior|
--- | ---|
|`Show`|convert a type's values to `String` values|
|`Read`|convert `String` values to a type's values|
|`Eq`|check if a type's values are equal or not|
|`Ord`|compare and order a type's values (requires `Eq` instance)|
|`Bounded`|specify maximum and minimum values for a type|
|`Enum`|enumerate a type's values|

### **Default Instances**
Haskell's compiler can define default implementations for all of the basic typeclasses above using the `deriving` keyword, followed by one or more typeclass names.

The `deriving` clause can be added to the end of the `data` declaration line, or on a separate line with indentation.

**Deriving a single instance:**
```haskell
data PokemonType = Grass | Fire | Water deriving Show
```

**Deriving multiple instances:** \
Multiple classes can be added to the `deriving` clause, but must be comma-separated and enclosed in parentheses

```haskell
data StarterPokemon = Bulbasaur | Charmander | Squirtle
  deriving (Show, Read, Eq, Ord, Bounded, Enum)
```

### **Custom Instances**
The default implementations usually give us what we need, and deriving it helps us avoid writing repetitive boilerplate code.

In some situations we want different behavior than the default implementations. We'll learn how to define our own typeclass instances in Part II of this course.

## **Conditional Logic**