# **Lesson 2-1: Working with Lists**

* List Anatomy
* Constructing Lists
  * Head-cons-Tail
  * Ranges
* Coding Break: Assignment 2-1


## **List Anatomy**
Lists are an example of a **parametric** type: they provide a context for data of some other type to inhabit.

Lists can contain values of absolutely any other type (but not more than one). This **polymorphism** is represented by the variable `a` in the list type's definition. You may have already encountered this polymorphic placeholder `a` in the signatures of various list functions.

```haskell
data [] a = [] | a : [] a
--                 ^ "cons" constructor
--          ^ empty list constructor
--      ^ type parameter
--   ^ type
```

## **Constructing Lists**
As we can see, a list is a variant type with two different constructors:
  * An **empty list** is constructed with a pair of empty brackets: `[]`
  * A **non-empty** list is constructed with "cons", a special infix constructor that takes two pieces of data as its arguments:
    * A value of any type (`:: a`)
    * A list of `a` values (`:: [] a`, also written `:: [a]`)
  >Note the recursive structure of a non-empty list: it's defined in terms of itself!

>**Note:** the "cons" constructor is the same as the `(:)` function you looked at in Self-Study 1.
```haskell
(:) :: a -> [a] -> [a]
```
>Just as a simple constructor (like `True` or `[]`) behaves like an ordinary constant, when a constructor has parameters it behaves like an ordinary function: it takes inputs of some specified types (here `a` and `[a]`), and returns a value of the type it belongs to (here `[a]`).

### **Head-cons-Tail**
We construct a non-empty list by applying "cons" to some value and another list containing values of the same type. The first argument (`:: a`) to "cons" is called the list's "head", and the second argument (`:: [a]`) is called its "tail".
>**Note:** an empty list has no head or tail - it's just empty!

The simplest non-empty list, called a "singleton", is created by "consing" some value to an empty list.
```haskell
aSingleton :: [Int]
aSingleton = 1 : []
```

We can construct larger lists like this:
```haskell
myPokemon :: [String]
myPokemon = "Bulbasaur" : ("Caterpie" : ("Pidgey" : []))
```
The parentheses above are included for explanatory purposes: because of how precedence works in Haskell we can just write:
```haskell
myPokemon :: [String]
myPokemon = "Bulbasaur" : "Caterpie" : "Pidgey" : []
```
And as we've seen already, Haskell provides some "syntactic sugar" for lists that allows us to construct them with more concise syntax:
```haskell
myPokemon :: [String]
myPokemon = ["Bulbasaur", "Caterpie", "Pidgey"]
-- the compiler "desugars" this to `"Bulbasaur" : "Caterpie" : "Pidgey" : []`
```
Every list consists of a head value cons'ed to a tail, which in turn may consist of its own head cons'ed to another tail, etc. As we'll see later, this makes it easy to destructure lists back into their components, and process them into new lists or summary values using recursive functions.

### **Ranges**
Haskell has a convenient syntax for producing ranges, or lists of sequential values. Ranges can be constructed for any type of data with an `Enum` instance. This includes `Int` and `Char`, among others.

```haskell
oneThroughTen :: [Int]
oneThroughTen = [1 .. 10]
--                    ^ upper bound
--                 ^ range symbol
--               ^ lower bound
aThroughZ :: [Char]
aThroughZ = ['A' .. 'Z']
```

Ranges in Haskell are *inclusive* of the upper bound.

**Steps** \
For ranges other than those that simply increment by one, a "step" can be specified by providing more than one element before the range symbol. The compiler will infer the step from the relationship between the elements. A step can also be used to define a descending range.
```haskell
evens :: [Int]
evens = [0, 2 .. 10]

odds :: [Int]
odds = [1, 3 .. 10]

descending :: [Char]
descending = ['z', 'y' .. 'a']
```

**Infinite Ranges** \
One of the unique and powerful features of Haskell is its ability to work with infinite data structures, which is made possible by lazy evaluation. Range syntax makes it easy to construct infinite lists.

```haskell
infinite :: [Integer] -- note the use of `Integer`, which is unbounded, instead of the bounded `Int` type
infinite = [0 .. ]
```
If we try to call this value in GHCi, it will print values until our system crashes! But it's perfectly fine to declare this value and use it lazily in conjunction with other computations that restrict its infinitude.

We can also specify ranges without an upper bound for bounded types too: even though they won't be truly infinite, they can still have indeterminate size.

The list functions `take`, `takeWhile` and `zip` are particularly useful in conjunction with such ranges.

```haskell
takePrimes n     = take n (sieve [2 ..])
primesUpTo limit = takeWhile (<= limit) (sieve [2 ..])
```

```haskell
pokemon = [
    "Bulbasaur"
  , "Ivysaur"
  , "Venusaur"
  , "Charmander"
  , "Charmeleon"
  , "Charizard"
  , "Squirtle"
  , "Wartortle"
  , "Blastoise"
  ]

pokedex :: (Int, String)
-- We don't need to know how many Pokemon are in the list: we can just declare an infinite range and `zip` will stop zipping when the other list is exhausted.
pokedex = zip (1 ..) pokemon
```