# **Assignment 2-1**

* **Q#01**:
  * Write a function `promptPlayer` that takes an `ActivePlayer` value and returns a string prompting the given player to enter a row and column position.
  * The string message will consist of three substrings joined together. We could use the "append" function (`(++)`), but when joining multiple strings it's cleaner to construct a list of substrings and use `concat` to merge them into a single string.
  * You'll need to use a function to convert the `ActivePlayer` value to a string. You can use the `show` function that was implemented when you derived the `Show` instance for the `Square` type, or use the `showSquare` function you wrote.
  * Test your function in a GHCi REPL session:
    ```shell
    cabal repl

    GHCi> promptPlayer X
    "Player X's turn: enter a row and column position (ex. A1)"
    ```

* **Q#02**:
  * Declare a constant `_RANGE_` that will contain a list of `Int` values.
  * Use range syntax to construct a list beginning with `0` up to one less than the `_SIZE_` constant you declared in Assignment 1.
  * Test `_RANGE_` in your REPL session:
    ```shell
    GHCi> _RANGE_ == [1, 2, 3]
    True
    ```

* **Q#03**:
  * Write the following two functions:
    1. `isDigit` will take a character as input and return a boolean value if
      * Construct a list of characters from `'0'` to `'9'` using range syntax.
      * Use `elem` with your range to return the appropriate boolean value.
    2. `readDigit` takes a character value and returns the corresponding `Int` value if it's a valid digit. If a non-digit character is given, return `-1` as a default value.
      * Use your `isDigit` predicate function and either an `if`/`then`/`else` expression or guards to handle the conditional logic.
      * To convert the character to an `Int` value, you'll need to use the `read` function. This function is available for any type with a `Read` instance. However, `read` takes a `String` value as input, and can't be called on a `Char`. Think how you can convert a `Char` value into a string first.
  * Test your functions in your REPL session:
    ```shell
    GHCi> readDigit '3'
    3
    GHCi> readDigit '$'
    -1
    ```
* **Q#04**:
  * Use `replicate` with the `_SIZE_` constant and the constructor you defined for an empty `Square` in Assignment 1 to declare two new constants, `_EMPTY_ROW_` and `_EMPTY_BOARD_`.
  * Use `_EMPTY_ROW_` in the definition of `_EMPTY_BOARD_`.
  * Test your constants in your REPL session:
    ```shell
    GHCi> elem X _EMPTY_ROW_
    False
    GHCi> elem O _EMPTY_ROW_
    False
    GHCi> all (== _EMPTY_ROW_) _EMPTY_BOARD_
    True
    ```

* **Q#05**:
  * Write a function `isTied` that takes a `Board` value and returns a boolean value.
  * A game is tied if it contains no empty squares. Think of which built-in list function you've encountered that can be used for this.
  * Consider the shape of a `Board` value: when we remove the type synonyms, its type is `[[Square]]`. What operation needs to be performed before you can check if the data contains an empty square?
  * Declare a constant `_TIED_BOARD_` to test your function. You can copy the code below:
    ```haskell
    _TIED_BOARD_ :: Board
    _TIED_BOARD_ = [
        [X, O, X]
      , [O, X, O]
      , [O, X, O]
      ]
    ```
  * Test `isTied` in your REPL session:
    ```shell
    GHCi> isTied _EMPTY_BOARD_
    False
    GHCi> isTied _TIED_BOARD_
    True
    ```

* **Q#06**:

* **Q#07**:
