# **Assignment 2-2**

* **Q#08**:
  * Write a function `getSquare` that takes a `Board` and a `Move` as inputs. It should return the value of the square at the specified position of the board.
  * Destructure the `Move` value in the assignment side of the function to access the row and column indices.
  * Use the `!!` operator to get the value of the square.
  * Given what you've learned about currying and partial application, define two new functions, `getSquareE` and `getSquareT`, which partially apply `getSquare` to `_EMPTY_BOARD_` and `_TIED_BOARD_` respectively. We won't use these functions in the project, but they're useful for practicing partial application and will make it easy to test `getSquare`.
 * Test the functions in your REPL session:
  ```shell
  GHCi> getSquareE (1, 1)
  E
  GHCi> getSquareE (1, 1)
  X
  ```
* **Q#09**:
  * Write a function `isNonEmpty` that takes a `Board` and a `Move` and returns a boolean value indicating whether the location is empty.
  * Don't reinvent the wheel: use `getSquare` in the function body.
  * Write two partially applied functions, `isNonEmptyE` and `isNonEmptyT`, applying the values of `_EMPTY_BOARD_` and `_TIED_BOARD_`, respectively.
  * Test the functions in your REPL session:
    ```shell
    GHCi> :r

    GHCi> isNonEmptyE (0, 0)
    False
    GHCi> isNonEmptyT (0, 0)
    True
    ```
* **Q#10**:
  * Write a function `stringToMove` that takes a move in string format (i.e. `"B1"`) and returns a corresponding `Move` value.
  * Use function patterns to define different versions of the function based on the string's length.
    * One pattern should match strings with exactly two characters, and destructure the string to assign variables to its first and second characters.
    * Any other string should return the `_INVALID_MOVE_` constant you defined in Assignment 1.
  * In the case of a two-character string, you'll need to process each character into an integer value using functions you've already defined (`convertRowIndex` and `readDigit`).
  * Test the function in your REPL session:
    ```shell
    GHCi> :r

    GHCi> stringToMove "B1"
    (1,1)
    GHCi> stringToMove "B11"
    (-1,-1)
    GHCi> stringToMove "a3"
    (0,3)
    ```
  * **Note:** it's okay for this function to produce moves that may ultimately be invalid - they may be outside the range of the board's dimensions or be already occupied by a player. We will perform additional validation in a later assignment.

* **Q#11**:
  * Write a function `replaceSquareInRow` that takes an `ActivePlayer` value, an `Int` value specifying a column index, and a `Row` value. It will return a new row with the square at the specified column replaced with the active player's tick mark.
  * The general approach is to split the original row in two, build a new second piece, and rejoin the pieces into a new row.
  * Use `splitAt` to split the row into two lists at the desired index. Test the behavior of this function thoroughly in your REPL session to make sure you understand the output it produces.
  * This problem requires some intermediate processing that makes having a child scope useful. Create one using either of the two methods you learned in the lesson. Inside the child scope:
    * Destructure the result of `splitAt` to get the two list values.
    * Use conditional logic to ensure the new piece is constructed correctly under various edge cases:
      * A column index exceeding the row's size or a negative column index should return the original row value, unchanged.
      * The `null` function may be helpful to check for edge cases
      * You'll need to remove the original square at the specified column index. Think which built-in function can help with this.
  * Join the new row components in the parent scope
  * Test the function in your REPL session:
    ```shell
    GHCi> :r

    GHCi> rX = replaceSquareInRow X
    GHCi> rO = replaceSquareInRow O
    GHCi> e = head _EMPTY_BOARD_
    GHCi> t = last _TIED_BOARD_
    GHCi> rX 0 e
    [X,E,E]
    GHCi> rO 1 t
    [O,O,O]
    GHCi> rX 3 e
    [E,E,E]
    GHCi> rO (-1) e
    [E,E,E]
    GHCi> rX 0 []
    []
    ```